## Seminar on User-Centered Programming Interfaces, Autumn 2025
Programming interfaces are not just for professional programmers and CS majors. With the pervasive spread of computing technology, various programming interfaces have been designed to support different end users (e.g., scientists, artists, journalists) to communicate their intent to computers.

This course introduces students to research topics around the principles and practices of designing user-centered programming interfaces. We will explore and discuss research papers that focus on various design and interaction techniques to support programmers of various backgrounds. We will start by discussing the properties of programming interfaces and understanding programmers from various specialized domains. We will then dive into the topic of usable programming environments, including interactive programming paradigms such as structured editing, programming by demonstration, live programming, and literate programming; collaborative and inclusive programming interfaces that allow programmers to build upon each other's work; interfaces specifically designed for better learning and teaching in computer science. Finally, we discuss how AI is reshaping the future of programming interfaces.​

### Course Logistics
| Instructor | [Prof. Dr. April Wang](mailto:april.wang@inf.ethz.ch) |
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Time | Thu 16:15-18:00 |
| Location | CAB G 52 |
| Language of Instruction | English |
| Credits | 2 Credits |
| Course Catalogue | [VVZ](https://www.vvz.ethz.ch/Vorlesungsverzeichnis/lerneinheit.view?semkez=2025W&ansicht=LEHRVERANSTALTUNGEN&lerneinheitId=193088&lang=en) 
| Office Hours | [Booking](https://doodle.com/bp/aprilwang/office-hour) 


### Course Format
This research seminar group meets weekly for 90 minutes discussions on selected topics. Each week we will discuss two topics. Students are expected to read the assigned papers in advance. For each topic, two discussion leaders will be assigned: one will present on the topic, and the other will moderate the discussion.

By the end of the semester, students will submit a short writeup (~800 words) of their presented topic in the form of a blog post. Students are expected to explore additional research papers on that topic, summarize the opinions collected from the seminar discussions, and connect the conversation to relevant literature. Together, we will update this site as a collective learning resource for future students and researchers.

### Syllabus

| W  | D     | Topic                                   | Notes                                                      |
|----|-------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1  | 9.18  | Introduction                            |                                                            |
| 2  | 9.25  | Programmers and Programming Interfaces  | The Programmer’s Brain<br>Programming Interfaces           |
| | | |
| 3  | 10.2  | Break                                   | No Class                       |
| | | |
| 4  | 10.9  | Code Visualization                      | Visual Debugging<br>In Situ Visualization                  |
| 5  | 10.16 | Structure and Syntax                    | Structured Editors<br>Task Decomposition                   |
| 6  | 10.23 | Visual Editing & Sketching              | Sketching and Diagramming<br>Programming by Demonstration  |
| 7  | 10.30 | Blending Prose and Code                 | Meta Code<br>Computational Notebooks                       |
| 8  | 11.6  | Collaborative Programming               | Version Management<br>Real-time Collaborative Editing      |
| 9  | 11.13 | Creative Coding                         | Digital Art Work<br>Programming Scenes                     |
| 10 | 11.20 | Accessibility and Developer Community   | Developer Community<br>Accessibility                       |
| 11 | 11.27 | Programming with Data                   | Programming Interactive Articles<br>Programming Data with LLM |
| 12 | 12.4  | Programming Interface for Learners      | Code Clustering<br>Code Tutorials                          |
| 13 | 12.11 | Programming Interface for Kids          | No Code Environment<br>Tangible Programming                |
| 14 | 12.18 | Break                                   | No class                                                   |

### Reading List

#### Overview
##### Programming Interfaces Overview
- Amy Ko’s Book Chapter on Programming Interfaces
- Bret Victor’s Talk on Inventing on Principle
##### Understanding Programmers
- Mark Guzdial’s Book Chapter on What Does Computing for Everyone Mean?
- Ko, A. J., Abraham, R., Beckwith, L., Blackwell, A., Burnett, M., Erwig, M., ... & Wiedenbeck, S. (2011). The state of the art in end-user software engineering. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 43(3), 1-44.
- Hermans, F. (2021). The Programmer's Brain: What every programmer needs to know about cognition. Simon and Schuster.
##### Ways of Knowing:
- Green, T. R. G., & Petre, M. (1996). Usability analysis of visual programming environments: a ‘cognitive dimensions’ framework. Journal of Visual Languages & Computing, 7(2), 131-174.
- Oliveira, D., Bruno, R., Madeiral, F., & Castor, F. (2020, September). Evaluating code readability and legibility: An examination of human-centric studies. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution (ICSME) (pp. 348-359). IEEE.

#### Code Visualization
##### Visual Debugging:
- Python Tutor: Guo, P. J. (2013, March). Online python tutor: embeddable web-based program visualization for cs education. In Proceeding of the 44th ACM technical symposium on Computer science education (pp. 579-584).
- Log-it: Jiang, P., Sun, F., & Xia, H. (2023, April). Log-it: Supporting Programming with Interactive, Contextual, Structured, and Visual Logs. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-16).
Ply: Lim, S., Hibschman, J., Zhang, H., & O'Rourke, E. (2018, October). Ply: A visual web inspector for learning from professional webpages. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 991-1002).

##### In Situ Visualization:
- Code Augmenting: Jane Hoffswell, Arvind Satyanarayan, and Jeffrey Heer. 2018. Augmenting Code with In Situ Visualizations to Aid Program Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Paper 532, 1–12. 
- WaitGPT: Liwenhan Xie, Chengbo Zheng, Haijun Xia, Huamin Qu, and Chen Zhu-Tian. 2024. WaitGPT: Monitoring and Steering Conversational LLM Agent in Data Analysis with On-the-Fly Code Visualization. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 119, 1–14. 
#### Structure and Syntax
##### Structured Editors:
- Hazelnut: Omar, C., Voysey, I., Hilton, M., Aldrich, J., & Hammer, M. A. (2017). Hazelnut: a bidirectionally typed structure editor calculus. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 52(1), 86-99.
- Beckmann, T., Rein, P., Ramson, S., Bergsiek, J., & Hirschfeld, R. (2023, April). Structured Editing for All: Deriving Usable Structured Editors from Grammars. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-16).

##### Task Decomposition:
- Kazemitabaar, M., Williams, J., Drosos, I., Grossman, T., Henley, A. Z., Negreanu, C., & Sarkar, A. (2024, October). Improving steering and verification in AI-assisted data analysis with interactive task decomposition. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 1-19).
- ChainForge: Arawjo, I., Swoopes, C., Vaithilingam, P., Wattenberg, M., & Glassman, E. (2023). ChainForge: A Visual Toolkit for Prompt Engineering and LLM Hypothesis Testing. In Proceedings of the 2024 chi conference on human factors in computing systems
##### Foundational Papers (Optional):
- Blackwell, A. F. (2002, September). First steps in programming: A rationale for attention investment models. In Proceedings IEEE 2002 Symposia on Human Centric Computing Languages and Environments (pp. 2-10). IEEE.
#### Visual Editing & Sketching
##### Sketching and Diagramming
- Code Shaping: Ryan Yen, Jian Zhao, and Daniel Vogel. 2025. Code Shaping: Iterative Code Editing with Free-form AI-Interpreted Sketching. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 872, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713822
- Devamardeep Hayatpur, Brian Hempel, Richard Lin, and Haijun Xia. 2025. The Shapes of Abstraction in Data Structure Diagrams. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 883, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713723

#### Programming by Demonstration
- Helena: Chasins, S., & Bodik, R. (2017). Skip blocks: reusing execution history to accelerate web scripts. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, 1(OOPSLA), 1-28. 
- reCode: Wode Ni, Joshua Sunshine, Vu Le, Sumit Gulwani, and Titus Barik. 2021. ReCode : A Lightweight Find-and-Replace Interaction in the IDE for Transforming Code by Example. In The 34th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST '21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 258–269. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472749.3474748

##### Foundational Papers (Optional):
- Cypher, A., & Halbert, D. C. (Eds.). (1993). Watch what I do: programming by demonstration. MIT press.
- Lieberman, H. (Ed.). (2001). Your wish is my command: Programming by example. Morgan Kaufmann.

#### Blending Prose and Code
##### Meta Code
- Torii: Head, A., Jiang, J., Smith, J., Hearst, M. A., & Hartmann, B. (2020, April). Composing flexibly-organized step-by-step tutorials from linked source code, snippets, and outputs. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-12).
- Meta-manager: Horvath, A., Macvean, A., & Myers, B. A. (2024). Meta-Manager: A Tool for Collecting and Exploring Meta Information about Code.In Proceedings of the 2024 chi conference on human factors in computing systems

##### Computational Notebooks
- Pagebreaks: Eric Rawn and Sarah E. Chasins. 2025. Pagebreaks: Multi-Cell Scopes in Computational Notebooks. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 53, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713620 
- mage: Kery, M. B., Ren, D., Hohman, F., Moritz, D., Wongsuphasawat, K., & Patel, K. (2020, October). mage: Fluid moves between code and graphical work in computational notebooks. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 140-151).

##### Foundational Papers (Optional):
- Knuth (1984). Literate Programming. Comput. J.
Kluyver et al. (2016). Jupyter Notebooks – a Publishing Format for Reproducible Computational Workflows
#### Collaborative Programming
##### Version Management
- Verdant: Kery, M. B., John, B. E., O'Flaherty, P., Horvath, A., & Myers, B. A. (2019, May). Towards effective foraging by data scientists to find past analysis choices. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-13).
- Code Gathering: Head, A., Hohman, F., Barik, T., Drucker, S. M., & DeLine, R. (2019, May). Managing messes in computational notebooks. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-12).

##### Real-time Collaborative Editing
- Collabode: Goldman, M., Little, G., & Miller, R. C. (2011, October). Real-time collaborative coding in a web IDE. In Proceedings of the 24th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology (pp. 155-164).
- Coprompt: Feng, L., Yen, R., You, Y., Fan, M., Zhao, J., & Lu, Z. (2024, May). Coprompt: Supporting prompt sharing and referring in collaborative natural language programming. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-21).

##### Foundational Papers (Optional):
- Ellis, C. A., & Gibbs, S. J. (1989, June). Concurrency control in groupware systems. In Proceedings of the 1989 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data (pp. 399-407).
#### Creative Coding
##### Digital Art Work
- Mcnutt, A. M., Outkine, A., & Chugh, R. (2023, April). A study of editor features in a creative coding classroom. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-15).
- Spellburst: Angert, T., Suzara, M., Han, J., Pondoc, C., and Subramonyam, H. 2023. Spellburst: A Node-based Interface for Exploratory Creative Coding with Natural Language Prompts. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST '23).

##### Programming Scenes
- FlowMatic: Lei Zhang and Steve Oney. 2020. FlowMatic: An Immersive Authoring Tool for Creating Interactive Scenes in Virtual Reality. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST '20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 342–353. https://doi.org/10.1145/3379337.3415824 
- Worldsmith: Dang, H., Brudy, F., Fitzmaurice, G., & Anderson, F. (2023, October). Worldsmith: Iterative and expressive prompting for world building with a generative ai. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 1-17).
#### Accessibility and Developer Community
##### Developer Community
- Social Q&A: Ford, D., Lustig, K., Banks, J., & Parnin, C. (2018, April). " We Don't Do That Here" How Collaborative Editing with Mentors Improves Engagement in Social Q&A Communities. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1-12).
- Tidy Tuesday: Shrestha, N., Barik, T., & Parnin, C. (2021). Remote, but Connected: How# TidyTuesday Provides an Online Community of Practice for Data Scientists. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 5(CSCW1), 1-31.

#### Accessibility
- Tangiblegrid: Li, J., Yan, Z., Jarjue, E. H., Shetty, A., & Peng, H. (2022, October). Tangiblegrid: Tangible web layout design for blind users. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 1-12).
- Axnav: Taeb, M., Swearngin, A., Schoop, E., Cheng, R., Jiang, Y., & Nichols, J. (2024, May). Axnav: Replaying accessibility tests from natural language. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-16).


#### Programming with Data
##### Programming Interactive Articles
- CrossData: Chen, Z., & Xia, H. (2022, April). Crossdata: Leveraging text-data connections for authoring data documents. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-15).
- Idyll: Conlen, M., & Heer, J. (2018, October). Idyll: A markup language for authoring and publishing interactive articles on the web. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (pp. 977-989).

##### Programming Data with LLM
- Gu, K., Grunde-McLaughlin, M., McNutt, A., Heer, J., & Althoff, T. (2024, May). How do data analysts respond to ai assistance? a wizard-of-oz study. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-22).
- Liu, M. X., Sarkar, A., Negreanu, C., Zorn, B., Williams, J., Toronto, N., & Gordon, A. D. (2023, April). “What it wants me to say”: Bridging the abstraction gap between end-user programmers and code-generating large language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-31).
#### Programming Interface for Learners
##### Code Clustering
- VizProg: Zhang, A. G., Chen, Y., & Oney, S. (2023, April). Vizprog: Identifying misunderstandings by visualizing students’ coding progress. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-16).
- CPVis: Gefei Zhang, Shenming Ji, Yicao Li, Jingwei Tang, Jihong Ding, Meng Xia, Guodao Sun, and Ronghua Liang. 2025. CPVis: Evidence-based Multimodal Learning Analytics for Evaluation in Collaborative Programming. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 50, 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3706598.3713353 

##### Code Tutorials
- Kazemitabaar, M., Huang, O., Suh, S., Henley, A. Z., & Grossman, T. (2025, March). Exploring the design space of cognitive engagement techniques with ai-generated code for enhanced learning. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (pp. 695-714).
- Alok Mysore and Philip J. Guo. 2018. Porta: Profiling Software Tutorials Using Operating-System-Wide Activity Tracing. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST '18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 201–212. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242587.3242633


#### Programming Interface for Young Learners
##### No Code Environment
- Scratch: Resnick, M., Maloney, J., Monroy-Hernández, A., Rusk, N., Eastmond, E., Brennan, K., ... & Kafai, Y. (2009). Scratch: programming for all. Communications of the ACM, 52(11), 60-67.
- Co-ML: Tseng, T., King Chen, J., Abdelrahman, M., Kery, M. B., Hohman, F., Hilliard, A., & Shapiro, R. B. (2023, June). Collaborative Machine Learning Model Building with Families Using Co-ML. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM Interaction Design and Children Conference (pp. 40-51).

##### Tangible Programming
- Strawbies: Hu, F., Zekelman, A., Horn, M., & Judd, F. (2015, June). Strawbies: explorations in tangible programming. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children (pp. 410-413).
- Melcer, E. F., & Isbister, K. (2018, April). Bots & (Main) frames: exploring the impact of tangible blocks and collaborative play in an educational programming game. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1-14).


### Grading
#### Grading Rubric
- Presentations: 50%
- Participation in discussions: 20%
- Final blog post: 30%

#### Grading Criteria for the Presentation
The presenters should assume that everyone has already read the paper before the class. At the beginning of the discussion, they should prepare a short presentation to remind the audience what this paper is about, and how this paper fits into the broader field.

- Understanding of the topic (20 points): Do presenters demonstrate thorough understanding of the paper and explains key points clearly and confidently?
- Quality of the presentation (10 points): Is the presentation well-organized and engaging?
- Depth of the analysis (20 points): Do presenters provide insights beyond the paper?  Do presenters connect the paper to related work or broader field?
- Facilitation of discussion (25 points): Do presenters actively facilitate a balanced, engaging discussion from all students?
- Quality of questions and prompts (25 points): Do presenters provide insightful and thought-provoking questions?

For each presentation, we give the presenter and the discussion moderator the same grade. Teamwork is important!

#### Grading Criteria for Participations
- The instructor team will keep track of the participation for each lecture.
- The presentation team will pick 5 MVP audience who get one bonus point for participation.

#### Grading Criteria for the Blog Post
- Motivating the research topic (20 points): Is the topic well-motivated?  Is the relevance of the topic clearly explained?
- Depth of the content (50 points): Does the blog post provide valuable insights for experts? Does it demonstrate the author's deep understanding of the topic?
- Engagement and clarity (20 points): Does the blog post explain ideas in a way that general audiences can understand? Is the content engaging?
- Writing (10 points): Is the blog post well-written? Does the author cite and integrate quality sources?
- Bonus point, Forward-thinking (20 points): Does the blog post offer new insights or creative perspectives on the topic? We encourage you to think wild about the future of programming interfaces on your chosen topic.